

Bag Packing Problem


This is a simple implementation of a genetic algorithm, to the bin packing optimisation problem.
This means that genetic theory is applied to the problem, which can be done by selection the most successful in the population, 
using some function by which to breed them and then applying random mutations to avoid a local maximum. 


To explain how it works first let me describe the model I used:
    
    bricks
        they are items with both a value and a weight

    bag
        hold bricks

    generation
        a collection of bags

The goal (fitness function) is to have the bag with the highest value.


Description of the algorithm

I first generate a new generation which is essentially bags with random bricks in chosen from a pool.
Then I choose the top 50% of that generation and randomly pair them together
I breed these pairs to create 4 children from each pair which get a random assortment of bricks from their parents
Children then have a variable chance of being mutated which means they gain or lose a brick. ( the brick they gain isn't necessarily from their parents)

To see whether the algorithm gets the optimal answer, we can use a non genetic algorithm to calculate it which goes as follows:

Find the brick with the best value/weight value
put as many of these in the bag until you can fit no more
then put the next item in the bag until you can fit no more of them
continue until the bag is full or you have tried to add all the bricks


Questions I want to answer:
    How does the generation size effect finding the optimal answer?
    How does the generation number effect finding the optimal answer?
    How does mutation variation effect finding the optimal answer?


Generation Size

    How does the size of the generation effect how quickly the optimal answer is reached?
    If we look at genetic theory then the smaller the generation size is,
    the less genetic diversity there is within a population this means that local maximums
    are reached fairly often and if the value of mutation is low then the population may never
    escape from the local maximum.
    
    If we look at a population with no mutation then we can see that their maximum is totally at the mercy of the bricks
    they initially receive.
    
    <graphs of populations reaching local maximums generation size small, 0 mutation>
    
    If we then increase the mutation value we can see that sometime it escapes its local maximums but often doesn't.
    
    <graphs with same gen size but more and more mutation>
    
    now if we increase the population size we see that without mutation it almost always reaches the optimal value
    
    <lage generation size graph>
    



        
